xx PREFACE.

nethy, while he qu'itclaims all his right in the advowson of the
church, with its dependent chapels of Dron, Dunbulg, and Errol,
and with the lands of Belach and Petinlouer‚ grants to the Abbey
of Arbroath the half of the tithes of the property of himself and
his heim, (provenientium eoe propria pecunia mea et heredum meo-
rum,) the other half of which belongs to the Culdees of Aber-
nethy‚ and the whole tithes of the territory of Abernethy, except
those which belong to the church of Flisk and Culter, and except
the tithes of his lordship of Abemethy, (de dominio meo de Aber—
nethy,) which the Culdees have always possessed, namely, those of
Mugdrum, Kerpul, BalehyrewelL Ballecolly‚ and Invernethy‚ be-east
of the burn. In confirming this gift, evidently the same day and
place at which it was made, King William uses the same wordS, with
this exception, that he styles the granter “ Abbot of Abernethy.”¹
Here, therefore, we have Laurence the son of Orm‚ Abbot of
Abernethy, an ancient house of CuldeeS, lord also of the lordship
or manor of Abernethy, and not only granting tithes out of his
own property there, but asserting it to be the inheritance of him
and his heirS.

These charter evidences help out the obscure indications in
our older chroniclerS, of a race of Church nobleS, hereditary heads
of religious houseS‚ and taking rank among the highest of lay
magnates, When we read ‚that the ancient dynasty of our kings
(before the wars of the Succession) sprang from the marriage of

Bethoc, a daughter of Malcolm ΙΙ. with Crinan‚ Abbot of the

¹ Nos. 34, 35.

